Cicadas
Alex Kuo

This happened in 1944, probably well into the August of summer, at 
least several months after the Yangtze had receded. The war must 
have started turning around for Chiang Kai-shek; daily, past the 
heavy wooden gates of our villa, endless columns of Kuomintang 
troops were marching towards the coast on the road parallel to the 
river. Breaking the monotonous clanging of their mess kits was the 
occasional low whirring hum of a staff car with its unit chevron, or a 
truck, its canvas flap concealing what was inside. But mostly there 
were hundreds and hundreds of soldiers moving at the same speed as 
the vehicles, their uniform the exact ordinary color as the road dust 
they stirred. Some of them didn't have rifles, and I remember my 
brother Will say that some of the others did not have ammunition. 
One or two of these faces would always be turned up toward where I 
was watching them from the top of the steps in front of the gates. My 
mother told me I had to keep the gates closed. I was five that summer, 
and lowered the bar on the gates as I was told. 
That was also the summer I learned about cicadas and departures of 
another kind. Will had a highly prized bamboo stick of at least twelve 
or fifteen feet long, and he taught me how to catch cicadas with it. 
First he would show me by example, then he would stand behind me 
and help me as I was tested before I was on my own. 
We would first slowly twist the upper tip of the stick around spider 
webs that were found in crevices around the house and the wall that 
surrounded it until the tip was darkened and crested with the sticky 
cobweb. When he was helping, there were four hands on that stick 
turning it in unison, and I remember feeling a sense of purposefulness 
in that exactitude. Occasionally he would ask me to let go of the stick 
so that he could reach higher under the roofs edges. 
Finding the cicadas was easy. We would stand still and listen. It 
seemed in that summer the steady stridulation of a high pitched resonance 
was always in the air. Even today when every other noise is 
down in my life, my inner ear would echo that continuous sound, the 
electrical strike of cicadas at first hearing. We would listen for breaks 
in that sound, a short but sustained grinding note repeated again and 
again, and follow it to the small darkish lumps on tree branches 
silhouetted against the clear skies of Chungking. 
The delicate movement of approaching the cicadas from below and 
behind was the most difficult technique to learn. It had to be done 
slowly, so the insect would not be frightened off, but not too slowly to 
allow its escape. I now suspect the truthfulness of this part of Will's 
instruction as much as his report about the soldiers' ammunition supply. 
Once enough strength was mustered to control the quivering of 
the stick's tip fifteen feet up and contact made, the cicada was 
doomed. 
What I don't remember now is what we did with the cicadas after 
wards. I imagine that Will probably had a little stickcage for them, or 
a matchbox, in which he kept alive our collection with daily ablutions 
of water. We would life it once in a while, shake it, expecting to 
stimulate ethereal song from the captured cicadas. This was the summer 
of my earliest recollection, held captive until now in these 
unspoken and inescapable images. This was also the summer in which 
Will, being married at the time, had accidentally slipped into the bed 
of a servant one night and was henceforth banished forever into a cage 
of his own making 
