Sunnyside Up
Lois-Ann Yamanaka

 for my father
 Twelve tiny bantam eggs all at once, all sunnyside up, until the brown
 lace on the edges crackles around yellow, yellow yolks. Yellower than
 store eggs, which father says is because bantam eggs are fresh from the
 coop.
 My father cooks a pot of hot rice. We put all twelve sunnyside up
 eggs face down on the hot rice. Father slurps up the egg white that
 hangs from his fork. I cook up more bantam eggs for my mother, who
 likes her yolks broken, Calhoon, who likes hers over easy, and me who
 likes mine sunnyside up just like father.
 The sunlight is pink on these mornings.
 Last Sunday, Father took us to Jimmy Lee's to pick out new
 chickens. He wants Aracanas which lay green and blue eggs. Then we
 can have Easter eggs for breakfast every Sunday.
 Aracana chickens are bigger than bantams, like regular chickens
 without fancy feathers on their legs. And a little uglier. But the blue and
 green eggs?I imagine them speckled in a tuft of grass, ready for
 finding. The Aracanas live near but not with the bantams in our yard.
 Father had injected each chicken with pox vaccine. Mosquitoes had
 stung the red-rubbery part of their chicken faces making them all bumpy
 with chicken pox. The real kind.
 Father held each chicken and injected each rooster and hen with the
 medicine he bought from the Garden Exchange Feed Store. And he told
 them what he was doing as he poked their faces.
 I saw a bantam rooster fly into the air once and spur my father on
 his eyelid. It cut like a boxer's, and blood dripped into my father's
 eyelashes.
 The rooster that knifed him got a second chance until the other day
 when it spurred him in the ankle. Father was trying to shoo the rooster
 and his hens out of the garage.
 The rooster got this: Father taking his wallet out of his back pocket
 slowly walks up to the rooster. And wham. Right on the head. The
 rooster is stunned, so Father grabs him, ties up his legs, then hangs him
 upsidedown from the clothesline, nice leg feathers and all.
 The morning turns to noon, and it gets hot. The chicken tongue
 hangs a little out of the beak. Then it turns to night. The chicken hangs
 until he dies. Even in the end, Father wants to let him go. Father looks
 funny with the tiny mercurochrome-soaked bandaid over his eye.
 Every day after breakfast, my father gives his papaya rind and lots
 of papaya seeds to the chickens. Every day by noon, the entire rind is
 gone. Father says one of the Aracana roosters must be pulling it off into
 the bushes somewhere.
 This goes on for days. Calhoon finds the rinds first. Rinds, chicken
 bones, and pork chop bones stuck in a hole under the aluminum shed
 from the Sears catalog.
 On a humid day, Father sees a huge rat, the size of a kitten, drag
 the rind, seeds and all, to the hole under the shed. So we set trap after
 trap after trap. Nothing. Nothing kills this rat who Father says must love
 chicken eggs too.
 Uncle Ed tells my father, Eh Harry, the fuckin' rat like papaya so
 much, braddah, why no poison that sucka. So simple.
 I watch my father pour grass poison all over the papaya rind and
 some chicken bones. I smell the poison strong and pure. Father places
 the rind and bones under the puakenekene tree. He keeps all the
 chickens in their coops. Later in the morning, the rind and bones are
 gone. Father and me never see the rat again.
 The other night while watching Combat with Vic Morrow, we hear
 the coops being hit like wire pulling and loud chicken squawking. I grab
 the Everready and run outside with Father. We see two white dogs, one
 huge and one medium, running from the coops. Gunfunnit, Father yells,
 goddamn Portagee dogs. No can even chain urn up night time, shit.
 This goes on for several nights. We hear loud noises, run out there,
 and throw a couple rocks. The dogs run off again.
 Uncle Ed suggests that we get a cage from the ASCPA, and Uncle
 Ed says, Trap those fuckas then call the dog catcher up and he gas
 those suckas by Saturday. Then you teach that damn Portagee one
 lesson to chain up his fuckin' dogs night time, Harry. My father agrees.
 We set up the cage that night. We put goat meat and some broken
 Aracana and bantam eggs inside the cage. And we wait. The chickens
 cluck low and soft inside the coops. The manure smells like sour
 scratch. And my father chicken-clucks to his bantams and Aracanas. He
 seems to say, Nothing going harm you. Nothing.
 In the morning, I wear my black rubber boots to the coops in the
 back. / got something! I got urn! Father yells. When I get to the cage,
 it is a huge torn cat.
 You mean it was a cat, daddy? I say.
 No. No way. Was two dogs. The two white dogs from that
 Portagee's yard. Gunfunnit. He neva do nuttin ' to my chickens. Let urn
 go.
 The cat runs straight-tailed into the honohono.
 Today, Father gathers smooth stones to slingshot the dogs to death.
 He goes by the lychee tree and practices. He aims for the fruit, and
 when the big red ones fall, I gather them and peel their bumpy outsides
 and let the juices drip down my lip. I spit the seed Clint Eastwood style
 like in High Plains Drifter. Father practices all morning.
 The dogs return at 8:00. Father creeps up to the anthurium patch.
 Then closer to the kumquat tree, then SMACK! Right in the white dog's
 ribs. The huge one screams, and they both run off. Father dances in the
 backyard like an elf.
 The next night, both dogs return.
 My father gets his pitchfork and puts a hapu'u log near the
 aluminum shed. The hapu'u is those dogs, he tells me. Watch this.
 Father raises the pitchfork above his head and hurls it at the hapu'u log.
 WHOOMP! Threads of hapu'u fly off into the grass. Then you the
 backup man, okay? You stone that sucka. Here. Practice. Okay, wait.
 He runs to get his pitchfork.
 Okay ready? WHOOMP! Stone urn, stone urn! Throw the rock,
 Lucy, you the backup man. I hurl the rock, hard as I can. We do this
 again and again. His pitchfork throwing gets very accurate. Always in
 the head.
 At night, the puakenekene bloom. The white dogs come. Father
 readies his pitchfork. I hold my stones. Father steadies. He gets within
 range. Close. Closer. He throws.
 I drop the stones to my feet.
 The pitchfork breaks flesh. And a human sound of something
 screaming. A frenzy of legs jerking and pulling, dragging a body and
 chickens squawking, hitting their bodies against the wire coops. The big
 white dog, brown shepherd eyes, and the concrete of the old duck pond
 covered with thick, purple blood. I swear, I see tears falling. I swear it.
 And the sound of the pitchfork handle hitting the dog's skull. It's
 a small sharp cry in the end. We never see the other white dog again.
 The sky is pink.
 Father has gathered the chicks of one of his bantam broods into a
 cardboard box. When the hen wants to leave, Father lifts the chicken
 mesh off of the box and puts a light bulb over the box to keep the
 chicks warm.
 One has a crooked beak. She cannot get the mash quickly enough
 as the others peck away wildly. He feeds her from the palm of his hand.
 She gets her own papaya rind and seeds. Father carries her everywhere
 and strokes her dark black feathers on her back. She has no name.
 He lets the one with the crooked beak roost at night in the stuffed
 pheasant he bought at a garage sale. // must be comforting, he says. She
 greets him at the back step every morning because she belongs to no
 rooster strutting his hens around the yard.
 The sky is pink on the morning when I watch her settle down and
 lay her first egg. I wash this one very carefully in the wash tub outside.
 Warm in my hands, I carry it into the kitchen.
 Her first egg, the one with no name, Father fries up in the big,
 black frying pan with lots of hot Wesson oil. He fries it until the brown
 lace forms a crackly halo around the yellowest yolk you have ever seen.
 And Father eats this on hot, hot rice.
