The Great Silence
Ted Chiang

The humans use Arecibo to look for
extraterrestrial intelligence. Their desire to make
a connection is so strong that they’ve created an
ear capable of hearing across the universe.
But I and my fellow parrots are right here.
Why aren’t they interested in listening to our
voices?
We’re a non-human species capable of
communicating with them. Aren’t we exactly
what humans are looking for?
*
The universe is so vast that intelligent life
must surely have arisen many times. The
universe is also so old that even one
technological species would have had time to
expand and fill the galaxy. Yet there is no sign of
life anywhere except on Earth. Humans call this
the Fermi paradox.
One proposed solution to the Fermi paradox
is that intelligent species actively try to conceal
their presence, to avoid being targeted by hostile
invaders.
Speaking as a member of a species that has
been driven nearly to extinction by humans, I can
attest that this is a wise strategy.
It makes sense to remain quiet and avoid
attracting attention.
*
The Fermi paradox is sometimes known as
the Great Silence. The universe ought to be a
cacophony of voices, but instead it’s
disconcertingly quiet.
Some humans theorize that intelligent
species go extinct before they can expand into
outer space. If they’re correct, then the hush of
the night sky is the silence of a graveyard.
Hundreds of years ago, my kind was so
plentiful that the Rio Abajo forest resounded
with our voices. Now we’re almost gone. Soon
this rainforest may be as silent as the rest of the
universe.
*
There was an African Grey Parrot named
Alex. He was famous for his cognitive abilities.
Famous among humans, that is.
A human researcher named Irene
Pepperberg spent thirty years studying Alex. She
found that not only did Alex know the words for
shapes and colors, he actually understood the
concepts of shape and color.
Many scientists were skeptical that a bird
could grasp abstract concepts. Humans like to
think they’re unique. But eventually Pepperberg
convinced them that Alex wasn’t just repeating
words, that he understood what he was saying.
Out of all my cousins, Alex was the one who
came closest to being taken seriously as a
communication partner by humans.
Alex died suddenly, when he was still
relatively young. The evening before he died, Alex
said to Pepperberg, “You be good. I love you.”
If humans are looking for a connection with
a non-human intelligence, what more can they
ask for than that?
*
Every parrot has a unique call that it uses to
identify itself; biologists refer to this as the
parrot’s “contact call.”
In 1974, astronomers used Arecibo to
broadcast a message into outer space intended
to to demonstrate human intelligence. That was
humanity’s contact call.
In the wild, parrots address each other by
name. One bird imitates another’s contact call to
get the other bird’s attention.
If humans ever detect the Arecibo message
being sent back to Earth, they will know
someone is trying to get their attention.
*
Parrots are vocal learners: we can learn to
make new sounds after we’ve heard them. It’s an
ability that few animals possess. A dog may
understand dozens of commands, but it will
never do anything but bark.
Humans are vocal learners, too. We have
that in common. So humans and parrots share a
special relationship with sound. We don’t simply
cry out. We pronounce. We enunciate.
Perhaps that’s why humans built Arecibo
the way they did. A receiver doesn’t have to be a
transmitter, but Arecibo is both. It’s an ear for
listening, and a mouth for speaking.
*
Humans have lived alongside parrots for
thousands of years, and only recently have they
considered the possibility that we might be
intelligent.
I suppose I can’t blame them. We parrots
used to think humans weren’t very bright. It’s
hard to make sense of behavior that’s so
different from your own.
But parrots are more similar to humans
than any extraterrestrial species will be, and
humans can observe us up close; they can look
us in the eye. How do they expect to recognize an
alien intelligence if all they can do is eavesdrop
from a hundred light years away?
*
It’s no coincidence that “aspiration” means
both hope and the act of breathing.
When we speak, we use the breath in our
lungs to give our thoughts a physical form. The
sounds we make are simultaneously our
intentions and our life force.
I speak, therefore I am. Vocal learners, like
parrots and humans, are perhaps the only ones
who fully comprehend the truth of this.
*
There’s a pleasure that comes with shaping
sounds with your mouth. It’s so primal and
visceral that throughout their history, humans
have considered the activity a pathway to the
divine.
Pythagorean mystics believed that vowels
represented the music of the spheres, and
chanted to draw power from them.
Pentecostal Christians believe that when
they speak in tongues, they’re speaking the
language used by angels in Heaven.
Brahmin Hindus believe that by reciting
mantras, they’re strengthening the building
blocks of reality.
Only a species of vocal learners would
ascribe such importance to sound in their
mythologies. We parrots can appreciate that.
*
According to Hindu mythology, the universe
was created with a sound: “Om.” It’s a syllable
that contains within it everything that ever was
and everything that will be.
When the Arecibo telescope is pointed at
the space between stars, it hears a faint hum.
Astronomers call that the “cosmic
microwave background.” It’s the residual
radiation of the Big Bang, the explosion that
created the universe fourteen billion years ago.
But you can also think of it as a barely
audible reverberation of that original “Om.” That
syllable was so resonant that the night sky will
keep vibrating for as long as the universe exists.
When Arecibo is not listening to anything
else, it hears the voice of creation.
*
We Puerto Rican Parrots have our own
myths. They’re simpler than human mythology,
but I think humans would take pleasure from
them.
Alas, our myths are being lost as my species
dies out. I doubt the humans will have
deciphered our language before we’re gone.
So the extinction of my species doesn’t just
mean the loss of a group of birds. It’s also the
disappearance of our language, our rituals, our
traditions. It’s the silencing of our voice.
*
Human activity has brought my kind to the
brink of extinction, but I don’t blame them for it.
They didn’t do it maliciously. They just weren’t
paying attention.
And humans create such beautiful myths;
what imaginations they have. Perhaps that’s why
their aspirations are so immense. Look at
Arecibo. Any species who can build such a thing
must have greatness within it.
My species probably won’t be here for much
longer; it’s likely that we’ll die before our time
and join the Great Silence. But before we go, we
are sending a message to humanity. We just hope
the telescope at Arecibo will enable them to hear
it.
The message is this:
You be good. I love you.
