Parts of Speech
Viet Dinh

Aaron, sitting up in bed, the sheet drawn up to his chest, has his hands in Kevin’s mouth, fingers tracing the shape of Kevin’s tongue down its slippery, bumpy length. Kevin tries not to fidget; the fingers have a salty tinge— they are rough and dry, like crab legs, shells and all.
“Try it again,” Aaron says.
“God’s got great gardens.”
Aaron wipes his fingers on the sheet.
“The back of your tongue is still coming off the soft palate too fast. Try the second part. Make it more nasal.”
“Green guava grows gargantuan.”
“Almost, almost. Listen to the glide on guava.” Aaron traces symbols on the sheet: grj— voiced velar nasal followed by a velar stop. “Try to let more air in through your nose,” he says. “It softens the sound.”
Kevin sprawls out across the sheet on his stomach, feet resting on Aaron’s pillow.
“I suppose that concludes our lesson for today,” Aaron says.
Kevin rolls over. “Don’t feel like it,” he says.
“Understandable. Then, after a pause, ‘So what did he look like?’”
Kevin straightens the wrinkles caused by the tent of Aaron’s feet.
“Sort of like you,” Kevin replies.
“Like me?”
Kevin picks pills out of his pajama bottoms. “A younger you,” he amends.
“A younger me.”
Kevin sees where this conversation is heading. He remembers Aaron’s picture albums, his life recorded in seven leather-bound volumes. The most recent is a chronicle of his decline, but even those photographs end eight months ago. When Aaron went blind, he refused to be photographed, as if he didn’t want to be captured on film if he couldn’t see the results. Silent blank pages fill the remainder.
“Maybe your nephew?” Kevin says.
“Say that word again.”
“Nephew.”
“You’re coming off the / too hard. Say it again, but put your teeth lower down on your lip, as if you’re puckering.”
“Nep/iew.”
“Much better. Remember, soft consonant sounds.”
Soft, Kevin thinks. Delicate. Feminine.
“So how was my nephew?”
Aaron seems pleased; he smiles— how delightful! Kevin thinks of one of Aaron’s ancestors, maybe his great-grandfather. Aaron has pages of long-dead, distant relatives, held by browning adhesive and flaps of cellophane too weak to keep themselves closed.
“Okay, I guess. Kevin puts his hands behind his head.
“Kevin,” Aaron chides, “what aren’t you telling me?”
Kevin slips his hands under his pants to warm them. His fingertips nestle into his pubic hair like piglets against their mother.
“I saw Latreece today,” Kevin says.
“You haven’t answered my question.”
“She got her augmentation. Her breasts really look nice.”
“Kevin, answer my question,” Aaron says, then murmurs: “Decolletage hell.”
“He gave me twenty dollars for a taxi home,” Kevin sighs.
Aaron shakes his head, so slight that it looks like a tremor.
“That’s it?”
“And thirty for my sick mother.”
Aaron chuckles, then coughs.
“Your sick mother? Oh, that’s precious.”
“And another fifty towards my college education.”
“You’re practically a United Way branch, aren’t you?”
Aaron crosses his arms and tilts his head back, his face engulfed by a smug smirk. He clears his throat and says, “There’s something attractive about pity cases, don’t you think?” His tone isn’t accusatory. Kevin neglects to mention the extra hundred and fifty.
Aaron doesn’t say anything after that, but breathes through his mouth, sometimes rasping, sometimes bubbling as if his lungs were covered by a liquid film, but soon, the breaths come deep and even, and Kevin knows that he’s asleep. He gets out of bed, leaving behind a warm indentation. He’s feeling sleepy himself. Aaron thrashes in his sleep. Sometimes Aaron snores, very loudly, without cessation, until Kevin stumbles in to nudge him on his side.

In his room, Kevin stands in front of a mirror, his mouth wide open. He checks his chest, where breasts were budding (they had been, at least— more like burgeoning pectoral muscles, squishy and doughy to the touch) before the prescriptions and doctor’s visits got too expensive. The location of his estradiol valerate injections on his right arm— his transgender track marks— has scarred over; it looks like Aaron’s smallpox vaccination now. He admires his rounded hips and thinks swimmer’s build; no one knows the difference. Before, he used to have terrible acne; once the injections started, it cleared up within days. Now, a small ridge of red pimples has cropped up along his jawline.
Kevin tries to focus on his mouth instead, on the parts that Aaron taught him: uvula, pharynx, dorsum, palate.
“God’s got great gardens where He grows gargantuan green guavas.”
Kevin wonders what paradise looks like, what heaven is like. Would Latreece have gorgeous full breasts and a scarless groin? Do you live out eternity as you were born or as you want to be? Kevin decides that however far you’ve gotten when you die, that’s how you spend the rest of time. He wants to be finished— the voice lessons from Aaron are part of this.
He repeats the line, sending the g up and through his nose, where the edges are filed off, where it re-emerges in his mouth perfectly rounded, soft. He remembers, from long ago, Aaron feeding him a cold sliver of mango (“Feel where that touches the back of your throat? Try to push the back of your tongue to that spot”) and its smoothness, its tart sliding over his tongue. He’s never eaten guava before, but he imagines that, when ripe, it tastes like g. He recites the line over and over again, determined to get it right.

“La Bare is pronounced la bcu, not lah bear as Kevin once said. The ‘la’ is a French indicator,” Aaron told him, “so even if it’s completely ridiculous that the French would establish such an operation in Maryland, you have to give it the French pronunciation. Maybe the management was playing off the possible double meaning of ‘la’— as both the French ‘the’ and as an abbreviation of Los Angeles. Los Angeles, you know, has connotations of glamour and glitz, but without the periods between the ‘l’ and the ‘a’ we can’t assume that. Wouldn’t it be funny, though, that instead of ‘the naked,’ they meant to say ‘the blocked’? ‘La Barree,’ pronounced la baje— but the extra ‘r,’ ‘e accent-aigu,’ and final ‘e’ wasn’t in their budget. Besides,” said Aaron, “‘la’ is the feminine noun marker and I don’t think that’s what they want to imply.”
“You seemed to like it,” says Kevin.
“Touche. You are correct. But things were different then.”

(The night they met four years ago, Aaron strolled in wearing a tweed jacket, wool pants, polished wingtips. He looked foreign, anachronistic; an English gentleman stepping into a fluorescent bawdy house. He had just begun teaching linguistics at the University of Baltimore, a three-year contract, possible tenure-track. He spoke without slurring; each word came out crisp, like \$20 bills from an ATM.)

“I’m off to work.”
“I hope you reel them in like fish.”
Like fish. That’s funny. How does he do it? It’s the soccer uniform: it emphasizes his extremely young boyish looks— scrawny legs, underdeveloped arms. The stage lights emphasize his facial-hair-free face (electrolysis) and smooth skin (previously Estrone, now daily scrubbings with a hard-bristle brush). When he dances, he looks at the ground, hands behind his back, puppy-dog look on his face. It’s an act, of course, in the same way that Mack dances in construction boots, stomping across the stage so that with each tectonic step, the drinks shift. It’s all an act, whether wearing a jock strap and pretending to play soccer or wearing a Walgreen’s standard-issue blue polyester vest and helping customers find sheer pantyhose.

Backstage, Mack is pulling on white tube socks. Mack is lucky; he doesn’t need La Bare for money— just for kicks. His boyfriend, thirty, is a lawyer. Mack does freelance graphic design. They have a two-story rowhouse in Bolton Hill where they throw annual Christmas parties that everyone talks about until the next party. Kevin has never been invited.
“Yo, Kevin,” Mack says, “How’s the old man?” Mack takes his boots off and plops them on the chair next to him.
Aaron isn’t old. He turned forty-nine three months ago. Kevin didn’t have any money for a cake, so he put a candle in a Twinkie and sang, in a quiet voice, “Happy birthday.” He didn’t light the candle, didn’t even need it, but it was traditional.
“Fine,” Kevin says.
“Good to hear.” Mack squirts sweet streams of baby oil into his hands, rubs himself down. “Well, I’m up,” he says. “I’ve got a proposition you might be interested in, so talk to me before you go, okay? Take it easy.” He strides out, warping the dirty tiles on the floor.
Kevin wishes that he could take it easy, but he can’t forget how much gender-reassignment surgery costs; the operation alone is \$30,000. But before that, he has to have a full continuous year of hormone therapy, as well as regular psychiatric visits. That adds up to— he has it written down— an impossible amount of money, a figure he can’t conceive of. Aaron was supposed to be his ticket to Easy Street. What happened? When he first met Aaron, Kevin prayed, “Let this be the one,” the way some of his friends had shacked up with rich older men. Like Latreece— she hooked up with a BET executive and now that she was an all-but-final-surgery lady, she could be seen out with him. When Aaron had been healthy, they had a separate savings account for Kevin’s operation— but as Aaron deteriorated, so did the account.

The tune changes, but Kevin still has a half-hour before his turn. The dressing room is right behind the bar, and the pneumatic hiss of beer kegs reminds him of snakes. He slides shimmering polyester shorts over his jockstrap and tightens shin guards over his legs. He closes his eyes, smells the leaking beer, and practices:
“Good morning. How are you?”
According to Aaron, women don’t speak as loud as men, so he whispers. He can barely hear himself.
“I’m doing fine, just fine. Nice weather we’re having?”
He brings home at least \$75 in tips. He gets only \$25 for actual stage time. He could turn a trick and rake in anywhere from \$200 (two full hours) to \$20 (backseat blowjob). \$50 goes towards food each week. Aaron has health insurance to pay for his own medicine. Kevin’s portion of the rent is \$100 a month. If he’s careful he can save about \$600 a month. The money he saves is hidden in large wads in his room— he’s ashamed, keeping it a secret from Aaron. It will take him another year and a half before he can start transitioning, and at that point, he’ll have to give up dancing. After he starts, he will run out of money in approximately six months, unless he saves more, but he can afford to wait a little longer, because he’s patient.

Jorge comes backstage, sweat glistening on his skin. Dollar bills have been gathered on the sides of his g-string, like origami flowers.
“Good crowd tonight,” he says.
Kevin purses his lips as if he’s interested.
“Watch out for the group of Dundalk boys to the left. They’re obnoxious and tip shit.”
“Thanks,” Kevin mumbles. His voice is caught between those high and low ranges again, as if he were hitting puberty. He pretends it was phlegm. “In a couple of years, I’ll have it down,” he thinks. His turn comes around, and the stage lights blind him— they always do— but his eyes adjust. Eight songs (approximately forty-five minutes) and he’s done. Then, after a half-hour’s rest, his second set, another rest, etc., until he’s had four. Jorge will leave and be replaced by Harris. Mack will leave and be replaced by Lars. Kevin will leave and be replaced by Jerome. It’s a comforting pattern, something he can depend on. Five minutes after he starts, the music throbbing like a sore thumb, he notices Franklin with his fingers wrapped around the neck of a beer. He’s tricked with Franklin several times, including last night, and expects that tonight will be no different. Franklin reminds him of Aaron four years ago. Franklin is so utterly harmless and nice that he almost feels bad asking for money.

Sure enough, on Kevin’s break, Franklin offers him water, since Kevin can’t drink while working. Franklin smiles and laughs— now, when Aaron smiles, it’s through wrinkles that bend downwards like frowns. Aaron does look like an old man, him and his strange mannerisms, his ability to have endless conversations with himself. Franklin doesn’t try to fill the silences, but accepts them; it’s nice, sometimes, to have the quiet without having to worry.
“How have you been?” Franklin asks.
Kevin mouths the word “fine.” The loud music consumes all conversations. He puts his arms around Franklin’s shoulders from behind, as if asking for a piggyback ride. The management encourages mingling to foster a friendlier atmosphere. Several of the other dancers are milling around as well.
“Can you meet me tonight?” Franklin asks.
Kevin nods, pushing his chin into Franklin’s back. The laundry detergent on Franklin’s skin smells of mountain air, fresh spring flowers, open spaces— something like that. Aaron requires scentless detergent— his skin is sensitive— and it adds to the stale air in his room. Franklin has a small, one-floor ranch-style house in Canton, but he’s done the best with it that he can. He’s the Director of Housekeeping at the Warwick Hotel, and Kevin wonders if he gets a discount on his furniture, because it’s nice and comfortable, like a hotel’s. Their lovemaking feels much the same— nice and comfortable, like a mattress that’s conformed to your sleeping style. If there’s anything he misses with Aaron, it’s that: he misses lingering on Aaron’s oddnesses. There’s a spot, three ribs down from his left nipple, that acts as a giggle button. Kevin pressed it whenever he could sneak his hand there. Nowhere else was he ticklish— not his armpit or knees or soles of his feet. The last time Kevin tickled him, Aaron laughed all the same, but it was followed by a hoarse coughing fit, doubling over from some internal pain. Kevin is very careful where he touches Aaron now.

At the end of the night, as Kevin sponges the sweat off his body with a towel, Mack says, “Hey, hold up.”
Kevin doesn’t stop dressing.
“How would you like to make a lot of money?”
Now Kevin does stop.
“I’ve got a friend who’s a talent scout, and I think you’d be perfect for what he has in mind.”
Mack crouches close, places an arm around Kevin. The baby oil’s powdery nursery-room fragrance overpowers everything.
“What do I have to do?” Kevin asks, strained.
“You do a one-day shoot, in and out in five hours, and it pays a thousand dollars.”
The number embeds itself in Kevin’s head like an axe. \$1,000. That’s incredible. He’s known people who’ve done porn, and they only made one-fifth as much. The money could go so far.
Mack regards Kevin and says, “This is going to be a chicken movie. Interested?”
“Let me think about it,” Kevin says.
\$1,000. Thirty of those would pay for the operation right there.
“Tell me soon,” Mack says. “I start shooting in a couple of days.”

Lars and Jerome are dancing the night’s last set. Since they’re the newest, they get the crap hours just before closing. Franklin is waiting. He asks, “Are you ready?” and Kevin has to think a moment before answering: “Almost. Almost ready.”

Aaron rotates his hands, the move-it-along motion.
“Try speaking a little faster.”
Kevin’s words crash together and thicken like old syrup.
“More flowing,” Aaron says, “less staccato.”
Pronunciation patterns are difficult to break. It’s like playing a tuba your whole life, then realizing it should have been a piccolo. Aaron has given him so many lessons, so many tips, that Kevin has trouble remembering one from the other, which one to do when. Speech: such a complex amalgam of breath, vibration, tone, and speed. Even now, Kevin has trouble staying relaxed when he talks. Once, when he was nine, he had to stand in front of a counselor and overcome a stutterin’ stg. He thrust his fists against the posts and still insists he sees the ghosts. He remembers sweating under the pressure to perform, the principal tapping a pen against a sheath of papers. When he gets nervous, the stutter reasserts itself, and that’s when he knows it’s time to shut up.

“I’m tired,” Kevin says, flopping onto the bed.
Aaron says, “You’re not even trying anymore.”
Kevin can’t remember the last time he saw Aaron out of bed. Aaron has a volunteer buddy who comes every week to deliver medicine, to change the sheets, to keep him company. Maybe they go out for ice cream or something. Sometimes they go to the doctor. Kevin is working when the buddy comes. Sometimes Kevin wonders what the buddy thinks of him— if he sees Kevin as a golddigger, waiting for Aaron to die. Kevin doesn’t know; he stocks shelves at Walgreens during the day. If a customer asks him where such and such is, he points.

“At least tell me where you were last night,” Aaron says. “I was worried.”
“Out.”
“Far out or just regular out?”
“Regular.”

Kevin tires of Aaron’s questions. He looks for a mirror, but realizes that there are none. Hadn’t there been one on the back of the closet? There are little holes and the vertical cracks in the wood where nails once held it secure.
“Well,” says Aaron, “don’t go wandering too far. I can’t go to sleep unless I hear you barging in. It’s something you get used to, you know. You coming home at all hours.”
Aaron pulls his knees up to his chest, the knobby outlines of his kneecaps two promontories in the mountain of sheet. He has a quiver in his bottom lip like a child preparing to pout. What were they now that they’d stopped sleeping with each other a year ago? Roommates? Friends? Kevin looks at Aaron’s frail body, the skin pulled over bone, and thinks of an old t-shirt, tattered, frayed, and comfortable; it still gave warmth, it still fit him perfectly.

“I’m thinking of doing a porno,” Kevin says finally.
There’s just a moment before Aaron’s smile drops, as he considers whether or not Kevin is joking. “Why?” he starts, then stops. “How?” but he can’t finish. He curls up as if he’s just been punched.
“Mack said he knew someone.”
Kevin watches the blankness on Aaron’s face.
“Are they paying you a lot?”
“Yeah.”
Aaron’s eyes, useless as they are, dart around, as if searching for an exit. When he can’t find anything to say, he looks so terribly vulnerable.
“You can’t,” Aaron says. “You’ve got to keep your vocal cords tight. They’re a muscle like anything else. We’ve done so much to get them so that you don’t sound so male, you know?”
Aaron looks just left of Kevin, and Kevin instinctively clears his throat, as if flexing. He hadn’t expected this reaction.
“You’ve got to get your voice in a position where it can ‘break’ back into femininity. If you let them go lax now, it’ll take a long time before they’re strong again.”
Kevin thinks of what it’d be like living with Franklin, if Franklin would drive him crazy the way Aaron drives him crazy.
“Besides, you can’t talk in a girlie voice. You’ve got to be a man, with the voice to go with it. The clothes make the man, but the voice makes the woman.”
“Maybe I won’t have to talk at all,” Kevin says, shifting from foot to foot.
“That’s right,” Aaron says. “It’s not like you have any lines to memorize. But there’s no quicker way to ruin your vocal cords than grunting and moaning.”
“But it’s good money.”
“Is that what it’s all about? Money? Haven’t you been saving money? Isn’t that why you moved in?”
“It’s only part of the reason,” Kevin thinks.
“It won’t be that bad,” Kevin says.
“Won’t it?” Aaron asks, urgency unraveling his voice. “What are you going to do once you hit superstardom? Will you be able to go back to what you really want to be? What you’ve wanted to be all this time?”
Me, a superstar, Kevin thinks. Everyone will know me. He can’t decide if this is a good thing or a bad thing.
“Are you willing to give it all up?” Aaron waits for an answer, and Kevin knows that if he takes a step for the door, Aaron will hear that and if he takes a step towards the bed, Aaron will hear that too. So he stands perfectly still, halting his breathing, because he knows that Aaron is searching for him with whatever senses he has left. Once Kevin transitions— it’s just a matter of time and money (he’s waited how long? saved how much?)— he wonders if Aaron will recognize him at all. Aaron stumbles more and more, as if blindness weren’t heightening his other senses, but taking them away.
And at what point would Kevin become unrecognizable? He wants to grow his hair out shoulder-length, maybe waist-length, to make up for years of crew cuts. He will core his Adam’s apple. He’ll unzip his skin and put it on inside-out, a burlap sack reversing into a satin gown. He will be gorgeous.

His screen test is downtown, the twenty-fourth floor of the Multico Building, a reflective black glass monolith. As Kevin approaches it on the bus, it looks like a knife blade aimed at the sky— all the buildings look that way. Some are jagged, some serrated, some straight-edged, but all sharp and sleek. He slips by security in the lobby and into the elevator.
A-l Productions has a small plastic sign on its door; the receptionist, a blonde with his hair in a Caesar cut, looks at Kevin suspiciously. He has headphones askew on his head and a necklace of thick metal beads.
“Who are you here to see?”
“Peter.”
“Do you have an appointment?”
Kevin nods. The office isn’t how Kevin imagined it. He expected wood-paneling, dingy carpet. This office looks like they could be processing insurance forms. He once went with Aaron to sign papers naming him as the beneficiary; this office looks the same, down to the rubbery trees and staticky beige carpet, except for the posters on the walls advertising Boyjuice and The Manhole 2.
Peter’s office is a room of windows, the shades all drawn. A video camera is aimed at a couch across from his desk.
“Do you have your driver’s license and birth certificate?” Peter asks.
Kevin pulls out a passport. Aaron was supposed to take him to Europe, but that never panned out.
Peter looks at the photo. “You don’t look twenty-six,” he says.
Kevin shrugs.
“That’s good,” Peter says. “The younger you look, the better.” He hands Kevin a box of tissues. “Could you please masturbate for me?” he asks politely.
Kevin tries to remember something really erotic, something that made him hot, but remembers it’s a performance, just like dancing. He groans— quietly, because it’s true: he feels his laryngeal cartilage retreating from the higher position Aaron had trained it to reach. He remembers Aaron pressing his fingers on either side of his throat, as if he were about to pinch his windpipe closed, and showing him how to sense what was inside, that little flap of flesh that meant so much. They used to make love after each voice lesson; it was only natural with the intimacy of touch and speech. Aaron kept a box of condoms under the bed, because there were no secrets about what Aaron had, about who Kevin wanted to be. In the good days, when the room he now called his own had been filled wall-to-wall with Aaron’s books, he and Aaron curled up against one another all night long.
Peter says, “You’ve got a nice cock,” and turns off the camera.
“I’m not finished yet,” Kevin says. He opens his eyes and starts feeling around blindly.
“I don’t want you emptying out,” Peter explains. “I want you to shoot a thick load for me on Wednesday when we start filming. Have Joey at the desk give you directions.”
There are papers Kevin has to sign, but he doesn’t bother to read them because he sees the money printed there, plain as day: \$1,000. Aaron would have had Kevin read the whole thing aloud, but Kevin just doesn’t want to care anymore.

The next morning, Franklin surprises Kevin with breakfast in bed— bacon, eggs— all the fattening foods that Kevin no longer eats because of Aaron’s strict and bland diet. He’s still full when he gets back to Aaron’s but prepares lunch anyway. He pries open a box of oatmeal with his fingernail and fills only the bottom of his own bowl, because Aaron only needs to hear him eating— he doesn’t need to know that he already ate. Aaron used to cook for himself— until the day he dropped a pot of hot water on himself. His eyesight was already going then, and the cookbooks were the first thing they sold.
Aaron is a lump of white cotton in bed. Kevin sets up the card tray that serves as Aaron’s table and notices pamphlets beneath the mattress sticking out like oversized pieces of luncheon meat in a sandwich. He sounds out the title:
“Vi-Ah-Tuh-Cul.”
Aaron stops eating to correct him.
“viattcul,” Aaron says. “Make your vowels resonate.”
Aaron reaches out, and Kevin puts his face within reach. Aaron’s hands have red lines from where the sheets pressed into them. A finger enters Kevin’s mouth and taps the top of his mouth, where peanut butter gets stuck.
“Feel them inside there,” he says.
Kevin tries again. It’s a word he should know, but doesn’t.
“What is that?” he asks.
“Nothing important,” says Aaron.

The shoot is in Towson, two transfers and a fifteen-minute walk. He can’t stop shaking— his teeth clatter, as if all the words he kept inside were clamoring to get out. He calms himself with vocal exercises. Humming, he feels the vibrations in his mouth’s resonators: pharyngeal, oral, nasal, labial. Here in the suburbs, the houses seem so much bigger than Aaron’s, with second stories, basketball hoops, long driveways, flower gardens— before he moved in with Aaron, he’d never lived in a house before. He wonders how much one costs, if he could ever save up for one. Like so many things, it seems out of reach.

The house is in the armpit of a cul-de-sac. Kevin, in his soccer outfit, feels like he just came home from practice. He knocks on the door hesitantly. Peter opens the door— the safety chain is on— and lets him in: “Hey, you look great.”
Other people are wearing boxers or are completely naked, but all have white tube socks. Some root around in the refrigerator; others drink orange juice out of plastic cups. One guy squats over a newspaper, clipping his pubic hair into a Hitler mustache. Another sits at a glass table, writing a letter.
“Drinks are in the fridge, enema kits in the bathroom. We’re setting up, so introduce yourself.”
Kevin nods his way around the room. He isn’t thirsty. The secretary from A-l Productions, Joey, is there. He isn’t a natural blonde. Lights on poles, like the kind in the Sears photography studio, cast a thick wall of brightness. Stale smoke and sweat linger in the room, masked by a musky air freshener. The guy sitting on the floor stubs out his cigarette in a potted plant.
Peter tells him, “We’re shooting in the rest of the house. Take off your clothes.”
Kevin compares himself to the others. Everyone looks similar— skinny and hairless; it’s like being in a junior high locker room.
“Kevin, we’ll break you in with Stan and Joey.” Peter sketches the scene: Kevin and Joey will be going at it when Stan comes in. Then he and Stan will double-team Joey.
Kevin tries to relax. Peter holds a camera to his eye; the red light blinks like an airplane’s. It looks small and cheap, like a plastic toy. He keeps himself from shaking. He pretends that it’s no different than being with Franklin.
“Where are the condoms?” asks Kevin.
“What are you talking about?” Joey sounds annoyed.
The red light on Peter’s camera goes off and the whole world seems to be set on pause.
“Are you joking?” Peter asks.
“No.” His voice breaks, and Stan snickers. Kevin says, “Aren’t there supposed to be condoms?”
“Mack told you what kind of film this is, didn’t he?”
Kevin shakes his head.
“This film is bareback. No condoms.”
A hot flash of embarrassment spreads over Kevin’s face. The others in the room stare at him, halted mid-sip, mid-clip. Joey rolls his eyes: amateurs.
“It was in the contract,” Peter says. “I thought you knew. Is there a problem with it?”
He knows that of everything he does— everything— Aaron would never forgive him for this. They could giggle about his tricks, about the sleazy patrons of La Bare, and Aaron never got jealous or upset. Aaron would never see the film, of course, but he’d hear it, or hear about it, and there’d be that moment when Kevin would see his face— Kevin sees it now: a scrunch of fear, anger, disappointment, a face that’s fallen in on itself. “Didn’t I teach you better than that?”
Kevin moves out of the filming area to where his clothes lie in a pile.
“Mack really should have told you,” Peter says. “But it’s your loss.”
The blonde who had been cutting his hair takes Kevin’s place. He contorts his body to avoid Kevin. The other boys ignore him, go back to what they were doing. Kevin laces up his shoes. Filming has begun again; he hears the groans— all of them fake, all of them better actors than he is. When Kevin first steps outside, his eyes are stung by the light; he’d forgotten it was the middle of the day.

When he gets home, Aaron’s buddy is coming out, his arms full of empty food trays. He’s Aaron’s age, looks just as worn down.
“I’m Joe,” he says. “You must be Kevin. Aaron has told me a lot about you.”
Kevin mumbles thanks and waits for Joe to continue.
“Why isn’t Aaron taking his medicine?”
Kevin shakes his head and bunches his eyebrows.
“He is?” Joe says. “I give them to him every night.”
“No,” Joe says, “he isn’t. I noticed a pile of pills under his bed. He hasn’t been taking them for a couple of days.”
Kevin wonders what else is hidden in his room, in their rooms, in the house.
“Do you know what a viatical is?”
“That word again.”
“It’s when people who are dying sell their life insurance policies.”
Joe puts his arm on Kevin’s shoulder.
“The sicker you are, the more money you get.”
Kevin doesn’t know what to say. He can’t understand why Aaron would want to get worse. They were doing fine, had been doing fine for the last four years.
“You should talk to Aaron,” Joe says.
Kevin storms straight to Aaron’s room. The pills are heaped on Aaron’s desk, like a broken strand of pearls. Aaron has the look of a child about to be spanked. Kevin wants to yell, to let his voice go, damn if he doesn’t scream like a man, but Aaron starts first.
“Why are you still with me?”
Kevin can’t answer. Instead he sorts the pills. He recognizes them by touch: AZT, a thick BB pellet; ddl, one of those bubble-bath-filled bulbs.
“You’re young. You shouldn’t be here with a dying old man.”
“You’re not old.”
“The hell I’m not.”
“You’d be better if you took your medicine.”
“I don’t care.”
“Please,” Kevin says, and his voice squeaks the way a woman’s would.
“Is it the money?” Aaron asks. “Because there are ways for me to get money.”
“It’s not that,” Kevin says, but he has to pause as soon as he says it.
“I can help you pay for surgery,” Aaron continues. “Not all of it, but enough so that we can both live fine. Isn’t that what we’ve been saving for?”
“It’s not about the money,” Kevin repeats, knowing it’s only half true.
Aaron considers this. Kevin scoops the pills back into their containers, the sound of hail against a windowpane. He twists the caps on, then untwists them to get the evening’s dose. He feeds them to Aaron, one by one.
“You know,” Aaron says, “I liked our relationship better when I was taking care of you.”
“I don’t need to be taken care of.”
“I know. I just liked it better.”
Kevin remembers Aaron the way he used to be, out of bed, dressed, doing things. Maybe tomorrow he can convince Aaron to go for a walk. Aaron could feel the sunlight on his face, breathe the air stirred by traffic. He could take Aaron’s hand, and no one would suspect that he’s doing anything but leading around a blind man. Maybe he could practice his voice again, get it back into shape. Then Kevin realizes that he’s got to go to work— he’s taken too many days off— the walk will have to wait. Like everything else.
“Come on,” Aaron says. “Let me hear your vowels.”
Kevin opens his mouth, throws his glottis open like he’s breathing, and goes through the vowels in one breath, a curious, breathy howl. Consonants are blocked, Aaron tells him, and that’s what makes vowels different. So. He’s a consonant right now. Aaron’s fingers caress his lips— not interfering with the sound, but shaping it. He feels the roundness in his vowels, the curves and smooth surfaces as he cycles through them, and he feels the sharp edges on himself falling away.
