New Arrival
Ha Jin

For years, Jia Cheng thought of leaving his wife and starting a new family. When he bought her out of a brothel in Gold County eighteen years before, he had not expected her to be sterile, although she had told him about her numerous abortions and miscarriages during the years of prostitution and had mentioned her doubt about her fertility. She was a tall, handsome woman with smooth white skin, glossy dark hair, and long eyes, which together with the curved brows made her oval face rather graceful. In the beginning, Jia was happy, since his wife knew men well and tried to please him in many ways. She did everything out of gratitude. Because he had bought her out and given her a family, she hadn’t had to stay in that profession any longer, to catch the pox and be educated later in one of the schools set up by the communists to help reform prostitutes from the old days. Nonetheless, she had been in three brothels for over ten years from the age of fourteen, long enough to forget her original name, which she probably had never had. A prostitute was always given a professional name, such as Spring Lotus, Gold Peony, Water Daffodil, White Dove. Usually the name changed once the woman was sold to another house. On the day when Jia bought his wife out, she signed her signature as Ning Feng Wen—the family name of the madam of each brothel she had been through. From then on, that became her name.

Eighteen years passed. Jia was in his late fifties now, still working in the only photo shop in Dismount Fort. Year after year, he expected to have a child, a son, but Ning had never been pregnant. Very often Jia regretted paying 200 silver dollars for his wife. If he had known she was infertile, he would have chosen another woman. “It serves you right,” he would think. “When you were young you only liked women who had kung fu in bed, but you didn’t want to spend money visiting those pleasure houses every week, so you brought her home. Now it’s too late to think of carrying on your family line. You’re already an old useless dog. It serves you right.”

“Did you touch the melons?” he asked his wife one Saturday afternoon.
“No—who wants to touch your rotten melons,” she said, knowing that he had hidden them away so as to take them to his mistress in Gold County next morning.
“But two are missing,” he said calmly.
“Where did you put them?”
“In the backyard.”
“Probably a dog stole them,” she answered without turning her head. She was busy making corn-flour porridge, beating the glue in a large bowl with an aluminum spoon. Quietly Jia put the six remaining melons into a white cloth sack and carried them into the small darkroom used for developing photographs.

Ning never asked him where he went on Sundays, but she knew, and tried hard not to let it disturb her. She had met thousands of men—they were all the same and couldn’t live without chasing a woman, just as every cat eats fish. She kept reminding herself that she mustn’t stop Jia, who was her benefactor. Besides, she had promised him before their marriage that she would never interfere if he took another woman, and that she would remain his servant forever. Because the new government had banned polygamy, he couldn’t have another wife, even though Ning was barren; in secret, however, he had been seeing another woman, whose name Ning didn’t know. While she appeared composed, Ning was actually ill at ease. “What if he gets a child with that woman?” she would think. “Will he walk out on me? Then how can I live?” Sometimes she woke at night, listening to the man snoring away beside her. She wanted to cry, but tears had stopped coming to her eyes long before. She thought it would have been better if she had never been born.

That evening after dinner, Aunt Zhang, who lived on Eternal Way, came to the Jias’. She sat on the edge of the brick bed, waving a palm-leaf fan. “Ning, do you want to make some money?” she asked.
“How?” Ning said, pouring Aunt Zhang a cup of boiled water.
“A young couple in the barracks is looking for a family to care for their baby boy—sixteen yuan a month. They’ll pay for all expenses.” Aunt Zhang pressed Ning’s white wrist with her shrunken hand as though to convince her that it was a good bargain.
“Well…” Ning paused. She had never done that kind of work before, but on second thought she felt like having a try. “I can’t always depend on my old man,” she reasoned. “If he runs out on me, I must make a living by myself.”

“If you want to do it, tell me now,” Aunt Zhang said. “The couple is desperate because the officer is leaving for the Great Gourd Island in two days and the mother can’t take care of the baby while working in the city. I’m sure lots of people will jump at the deal.”
“All right, wait a minute—let me talk to Old Jia.” Ning got up and went into the darkroom, where Jia was writing captions on photographs. After a short while Ning reappeared and told Aunt Zhang she would accept the work. The young couple were to bring their two-year-old the next morning.

“What’s your name?” Ning asked the little boy.
“Tell Aunt your name,” his mother said. She was a small, delicate woman working as a singer in an opera troupe in Dalian City.
“Lei,” the boy mumbled.
“That’s a good name. Would you like to have this, Lei?” Ning leaned forward and showed him a toy duck with four wheels and a rope.
“Yeah,” he said as he took it and put it on the floor. The wooden duck began quacking and flapping its wings while Lei drew it about the room. He pulled too hard and overturned it; its wheels spun in the air. Immediately Ning squatted down and set the duck on its feet. “Here you go, Lei,” she said, touching his ruddy cheek. The duck resumed quacking.

While talking with the boy’s father, a tall officer, Jia kept glancing at the duck and the boy. He was glad to see the little fellow so at ease. “He’s a husky boy,” he said to the young man, who had one stripe and four stars on his collar insignia. “You’re lucky to have him.”
“Sometimes he can be naughty—don’t spoil him,” the officer said with a smile, then motioned to his son. “Come here, Little Lei, and meet your uncle.”
The boy dragged the duck over and stopped in front of them. “Call him Uncle Jia,” his father told him.
“Uncle,” he mumbled, then turned away with the duck quacking.

Jia was very pleased. He took a melon out of the sack, which he had just put on a chair and was about to carry off for the ten-o’clock train. “Little Lei,” he called, “would you like to have this?” The boy’s dark eyes stared at the melon and then at Jia—as if he had never seen such a thing and wasn’t sure whether it was to play with or to eat.
“Don’t give him that now,” Ning said. “I’ve made some egg curd for him. Put it aside—he’ll have it after the meal.”
Jia set the melon on the table. Out of courtesy he took another two for Lei’s parents. “You try a melon, please—it’s very sweet,” he said to them. His smile revealed a gold tooth. He was so excited that his long, leathery face turned pink, and he couldn’t close his mouth. His wife thought he looked silly. The couple thanked him; Ning washed two of the melons in a basin. Jia couldn’t remain for long (he had to catch the train), so he excused himself, took up the partly empty sack, and left for the station.

“Lei, do you want to stay here or come with me?” the boy’s mother asked, testing him. Her large eyes were winking at the young captain. Lei looked at her, then muttered, “Stay.”
“Good,” his father said with a laugh. “You’re a brave boy—Mom and I will come to see you soon.”
“Always listen to Aunt and Uncle, all right?” his mother said.
“Uh-huh.” Lei nodded.
“He’s like a big boy,” Ning praised.
“We were afraid he wouldn’t stay,” the woman said. “I’m so glad he likes it here.” Her permed hair tilted toward the boy.

After they left, Ning fed Lei egg curd and rice porridge. He had a good appetite, and his mouth twitched with relish as he chewed. Ning noticed he had eight teeth.

Gold County was sixty // away from Dismount Fort, and four passenger trains went there every day. Jia returned before dinner but looked unhappy and kept to his darkroom, sucking on a thick pipe. Through the curtains he saw Lei chasing chicks in the backyard; meanwhile, Ning cooked dinner as the corn stalks sputtered under the cauldron.
Women are all greedy, he thought of his meeting with his mistress. Her face was long. “Three melons! Shame on you.” No use explaining—she wouldn’t understand. “I bought eight originally, but she didn’t believe it. ‘You’re so stingy—never met a man like you.’” How many men had she known, then? A hundred? For food and goods, for money? I didn’t go whoring—I planned no payment. Good thing I had no money today, or I’d have had to calm her with a large bill. Never seen her so mad. Greedy, so greedy. Women are all the same—waiting for me to bring them good stuff. At least she showed her true nature. Is she tired of me? Wants to get rid of me? Old, I’m old—so hard to please a woman. Remember to bring her more next week to make up for the three melons. What should I buy? Vanishing cream? I gave her some last month. Nylon socks? What color does she like? No idea. Walnut cookies? No clue. Useless—like playing house with a small girl. You can’t reason with a woman. She’s over forty and married four times.”
The door curtain opened. “Come out and eat,” Ning called.

Jia emptied the pipe and went to the table. Lei was on the brick bed, trying to touch the white buns steaming on the low table before him. Ning moved to feed him rice and stewed sole; she gave him a cork to play with as he ate. The boy saw the roasted peanuts prepared for Jia’s drink; he pointed and whined, “Want.”
“Want this?” Jia asked, lifting the dish.
“Don’t give him that—too young to chew,” Ning protested.
“Want,” Lei whined again.
“All right—take this spoon first.” Ning fed him rice, picked up two peanuts, and started chewing. In a few seconds she spat a lump of peanut butter onto his waiting tongue. He swallowed and gazed at Ning, then again pointed to the peanuts and whined, “Want.” He smiled at Jia, who was drinking white spirits.
“Isn’t Uncle’s home good?” Jia asked.
“Goooood,” Lei nodded.
Ning continued feeding him peanuts. Jia, pleased, sipped his liquor and said, “I like this boy—he’s so at home.” Then to Lei: “With a thick face, you can eat well everywhere. Little Lei, do you have a thick face?”
“Yeah,” the boy said, pushing the spoon with his cheek.
“Don’t talk to him,” Ning complained. “Can’t you see I’m busy feeding him?” Lei eyed the porcelain liquor pot; as Ning turned to refill the bowl, Lei pointed to the pot and whined again, “Want.”
“Hey—he wants a drink,” Jia cried.
“Don’t give him that—too young for that stuff.”
The boy’s face puckered as if about to cry; Jia turned back and gave him a few drops from his cup.
“Good?” he asked.
“Yeah.” Lei smacked his lips and held out his tongue again.
“My, what a drinker. One more?” He gave another drop.
“Don’t give him too much—he’ll get drunk.”
Jia tried to move away, but the boy kicked and wailed. Tears trickled down his cheeks. Jia returned and gave him a few more drops. After supper, Lei ran wild—his face red as an apple with happiness. He laughed and played hide-and-seek with pillows until ten o’clock, when he finally lay down between Ning and Jia. He slept so deeply that he wet the bed without a sound as they carried him to the chamber pot.

The next day at dinner, Lei again wanted Jia’s cup. The liquor was too strong, so Jia poured some apple wine into a tiny cup like a pipe bowl. Lei liked its sweetness. Every day he drank a cup and soon became Jia’s wine buddy. Jia would smile and say, “Little Lei, you’re lucky—Uncle has money and can buy you wine.”
“Yeah,” the boy replied.

Sunday came. Jia hadn’t decided whether to see his mistress. He was busy shooting and developing pictures at the photo shop, and in the evening he had played so long with Lei that he’d forgotten to pick a gift. Now he felt at a loss—did he have to go? After breakfast, he changed his mind: he would take the boy to the country fair. Swaying with Lei on his back, Jia turned into Main Street toward the marketplace. Near the army clinic entrance he met Meng Long, head of the slaughterhouse, sitting on a rock in the sun. Meng rose and asked, “Who’s this, Old Jia—a nephew or a relative?”
“A little friend,” Jia said. “His father is on the Great Gourd Island, so he stays with us.”
“Little fella—how old are you?”
“Two.”
“He’s big for two,” Meng said, patting Lei’s back.
“Yes—he’s a good boy. We’ve got to go, Old Meng, to the fair.” Jia turned to Lei: “Say goodbye to Uncle Meng.”
“Bye.” The boy’s white fist wheeled at the air like a mushroom cap.

On a fine summer day the fair was crowded. Peasants from nearby villages sold produce for cash to buy groceries there. Craftsmen—cobblers, blacksmiths, tailors, locksmiths, tinkers, knife grinders—lined the stalls. Jia asked prices, comparing them with last year’s:
“How much for an egg?”
“Seven fen—buy some, Uncle.”
“No, no.” He moved on.
“What’s the price for crabs?” he asked a fish vendor.
“Ten for a yuan—buy a dozen or two, Uncle Jia. They’re fresh, caught this morning.”
“No—they’re dead already.”

Many peasants knew Jia as the commune’s most experienced photographer; they came to his shop for family portraits. Jia noticed young women in baskets of produce—likely officers’ wives newly transferred to the Garrison Division. Most were pretty, well dressed, and didn’t haggle. One slim woman with a basket of tomatoes left a whiff of apricot perfume; Jia thought to ask her to sit for a sample portrait.

“Egg, egg,” Lei sang softly. Jia turned but saw no eggs. Following the boy’s finger, he found a pile of potatoes on the ground and laughed.
“Little brother,” a vendor said, raising a potato, “you say this is an egg?”
“Egg, egg,” Lei chanted. The crowd laughed and grew.
“My goodness—everything round is an egg,” a young woman called, holding up a small pumpkin. “What do you call this, boy?”
“Egg, big egg.”

The laughter bewildered Lei, who looked at Jia.
“Stop teasing him,” Jia shouted. “He’s not a monkey—what’s so funny? Did you call everything right when you were born?”

He carried Lei to a roadside wall and set him down. “Those aren’t eggs, Lei—they’re potatoes and tomatoes. The biggest is a pumpkin.” The boy, teary-eyed, puckered up; Jia held him. “It’s Uncle’s fault—I didn’t tell you their names. Don’t cry. Lei’s a good boy. Let me buy you a popsicle.”

Lei saw a popsicle cart approaching and calmed. Jia gave the vendor a five-fen coin: “One, please.”
“Milk or red bean?”
“Milk.”

Lei sucked the popsicle, clumsily moving it around his mouth. Jia watched, amused, and let him enjoy it. “Good?” he asked.
“Yeah.” Lei licked his lips.

Carrying Lei, Jia threaded back through the crowd past piglets screaming, cocks crowing, butchers chopping pork. Children surrounded an old deaf-mute bargainer, and elders played chess by the jellied bean curd stand. Under elms, youths read rented picture-stories. It grew hot, and Jia began to sweat.
“Fresh jellyfish—one jiao a bowl,” an old woman cried.
“Lei, let’s try some jellyfish,” Jia said; the boy nodded. They sat and bought two bowls—one large, one small—of sliced jellyfish spiced with parsley, leeks, and sesame oil. Jia ate, but Lei only stirred with his chopsticks; Jia offered him a piece. Lei spat it out.
“Don’t like it?” Jia asked.
“Nah.” Lei tapped the table.
“Kids don’t like jellyfish at first,” the vendor said. “They’ll get used to it.”

“Ha—you two are here!” Ning appeared from behind with a basket of eggplants and green beans. “I’ve looked everywhere—why did you stay so long? Is he all right?”
“He’s fine,” Jia said. “He likes looking around with me.”
“Let’s go home—it’s too hot,” Ning said, picking up Lei and kissing his cheek.
“Let me carry him,” Jia offered.

They never stopped talking and teaching names as they walked home. Ning remembered they hadn’t strolled arm in arm in years. “He always felt embarrassed walking with me,” she thought. “How happy—and young—he looks now. This little devil has captured his heart. If only I could give him a child… Too late. He should have married another woman.”

Lei’s mother came every other week to take him to Dr. Liu in the army compound, but his father could not return so often. Strange as it sounded, Lei did not miss his parents at all and was always happy back with the Jias. His mother was glad he never cried when she left.

For two days Lei had a fever. Jia took him to Dr. Liu on Bath Street and brought back two packets of herbs. The doctor said there was too much fire in the boy—the Yang was too strong—so the medicine would reduce fire and build Yin. Ning boiled the herbs, but Lei hated the bitter liquid; it took sugar and coaxing for him to drink it. Even so, his fever persisted and he began to cough.
“Close up the mosquito curtain,” Jia told Ning as she laid the sleeping boy on the bed. Behind his ear they saw a red blotch—probably a bite.
“Don’t you see I’m doing it?” she said, propping a pillow against the opening and kissing his cheek. “Little devil, you’ll be better tomorrow.”

Jia turned off the light, stripped to his undershirt and underpants, and lay down. Lei’s stuffy nose whistled softly until Jia fell asleep.

At about one o’clock, Ning woke him. “Turn on the light—Lei’s burning hot.” Jia pulled the cord and sat up. Lei’s face was covered in red spots.
“My God—he has a rash!” Ning fetched an old thermometer, shook it down, and placed it under his arm. “Lei, tell me where it hurts,” she begged, tears in her eyes. He moaned but did not answer; his lips were chafed and his jaw moved as if chewing.
“Get some water,” Ning said. Jia brought a bowl of water, a spoon, and a wet towel. “Here you are,” he said, sitting beside the child. “Lei—open your eyes. Can you see your uncle?” No response. Ning read the thermometer: it passed 41 °C.
“I’m going for a doctor,” Jia said. He rushed into the night.

He ran toward the Commune Clinic at the corner of Safe Street, murmuring, “Must save him!” Gravel underfoot felt like clouds in the moonlight. In five minutes he arrived, pounded the boarded door, and shouted, “Doctor—wake up and save a life!” No one answered. He dashed to the army clinic on Main Street.

Its lights burned late. At a screened window, he saw a doctor and two nurses sterilizing instruments.
“What do you want at this hour?” one nurse asked. They stared at Jia, pale and distraught.
“Help—my boy’s dying!”
“Why not the Commune Clinic?” the other nurse asked.
“Nobody’s there. The boy isn’t mine—his father is your officer. We care for him. Please save his life!” Jia choked with emotion.
“All right—we’ll come,” the doctor said to Nurse Liang Fen. “You stay here.”

They donned white robes, grabbed a med-box and flashlights, and followed Jia. At the door, Jia grasped the doctor’s arm.
“Thank you, young man—you’ve saved my life. You’re a good man.”
Nurse Liang Fen turned and tittered.
“Look at yourself,” the doctor laughed. “You have hold of my robe at your waist.” Jia realized he’d run out wearing only his undershirt and underpants.
“I was scared—sorry!” he mumbled, covering himself. The nurse handed him her robe.
“Put this on.”

They hurried east down the foggy street, Jia running between them, white as a ghost.

Lei had measles. The diagnosis relieved Jia and Ning—they’d feared smallpox. The nurse gave Lei a penicillin injection, and Dr. Chui reassured them: the rash would spread but fade in days, the fever would drop daily, and a nurse would return four times a day for injections. Meanwhile, Lei must rest, drink water, and eat liquids. As they prepared to leave, Jia returned the robe.
“Thanks—I was so scared,” he said.
“Next time, wear your pants,” Dr. Chui laughed; Nurse Liang Fen tittered.

After they left, Jia and Ning stayed up talking about Lei and watching his blotchy cheeks. They remembered all the things he’d said and done—the Moon Goddess on the wall he’d called his bride, his promise to give each of them a hundred yuan when grown, how he’d wet the floor and cried thinking it gone, how he’d stepped on the Mings’ baby and then offered him candy… Roosters crowed as dawn approached. How short the night had been—they could have talked for hours more.

Three days later, Lei’s mother came; he was almost well but still had brownish scales. She thanked the Jias and took him to spend Sunday at their apartment. Though he’d return that evening, Jia and Ning felt restless. Jia sat in the backyard, pulling at his pipe.

The day before, he’d received a note from his mistress: “If you don’t come this weekend, don’t see me again.” Without much thought, he wrote back: “I’m too busy on Sundays. Sorry—I cannot come. Too tired.”

Aunt Zhang stopped by. Laughing at Jia’s night expedition, she said, “Why don’t you adopt Lei as your nominal son? That’ll tie him to you forever. I can talk to his parents—they’ll agree.” Jia beamed.
But Ning frowned. “Aunt, I’ve thought of that. I’m an unlucky woman—if I’m fated to be childless, I shouldn’t have a child. Lei is bright with a good future; I can’t let my bad luck block him. He’s too good for us.”

Aunt Zhang stared in amazement. Jia walked away silently, sad but believing Ning was right. Lei was too good to claim. It was enough to know he’d return each afternoon and to wait for him each Sunday. Someday Lei would leave for school in a bigger place and then the wider world—but perhaps, as a friend, he would come back to this small town, to see them once again.
