Oe versus Dog Bamboo
Jon Kawano

Call me Oe. Father of the eponymous Oe Mirror which casts an
unreversed image of the viewer on its concave steel surface. One day
a hundred Oe Mirrors of all sizes will grace the walls of Oe Hall—
my future home and stronghold. Soon I will write my memoirs de
scribing my travels all over Japan and the United States where I was
the most persuasive encyclopedia salesman in the Southwest. Along
the way I strummed Okinawan folk ballads for the ladies on the
riverwalk in San Antonio. I feasted with the dirt-eaters of Mississippi
who confided in me their secret, tangiest banks of red clay. Most
recently I earned the stars and rights to my best story—an old fash-
ioned atavistic brawl, my first—a glorious man-to-man fistfight in a
posh Tokyo bar. Over a woman. An American. She appreciates
neither the story nor the irony of her figuring principally in it. She
rather wants to hear about Yuki Kara. Tell me about Yuki, she de-
mands, with a toss of her lush cocoa-brown hair. It would take de-
cades, generations maybe of iodine-rich seaweed and kelp, for yours
to get any of the blue-black and coarser weight of hers. (I have no
intention of telling her a thing about Yuki Kara. I know she hopes to
cajole from me some arcane Oriental womanry to abet her own fe-
male experience.) Soon, June.

I distract her by paying attention to her cat which has approached.
This will not distract her long. I think hard, but my mind is full of
Yuki. I see her dark, intelligent eyes. I imagine telling her the details
of my fight, truly one of my epic stories.

Once I cast always a disparaging eye on the ranks of meat-eating,
pierced-eared, broad-shouldered, low-heeled American women
who pass through modern cosmopolitan Tokyo. An opprobrious eye
well cast back to be sure. I’ve often sat listening to American coeds
pontificate on the non-potential of us Japanese males. “Ick,” they say.
“We smoke, we are unliberated and patronizing. We are Oedipal Pe-
ter Pans. We ally with our mothers to terrorize our wives. Our con-
versations never range beyond business and golf and we don’t come
home at night. Furthermore, our legs are short. We vomit after a sin-
gle glass of whiskey. We are coarse and rapid lovers. We never hold
open a door for them or give up our seats on the train.”

Curious then that I’d answer an alien damsel’s call to arms. (Credit
my allure, thinks June, credit my exotic Western gravity.) Actually I
was less pulled than pushed, kicked, propelled from my country’s
distaff. Credit a native force, Yuki Kara. Allowed hindsight’s extra
inch of awareness, I’d admit her eternal un-acknowledgment of me
as other than ordinary was made unbearable by my being, in fact,
somewhat in love with her at the time. I see now how her climactic
put-down (“Keep your snout out of my work!”) of my signature grids
and color schemes, sent the injured superego, steeped in unrequited
passion, pinwheeling onto the shoals of foreign womanhood. I might
add, with the same candor, that dear, cool, beautiful Yuki was fairly
and understandably jealous of my splendid English conversation
abilities.

Soon after, I left the company, resolved to become an “Evapor-
ated Man” as is the custom in Japan when you wish to flee a sorrow-
ful life. I moved, filed an unlisted telephone number and severed
many of my business and personal connections.

I set up a new life, freelancing at a large architectural firm dur-
ing the day and drinking alone at night. The hardest part of my “eva-
poration” was finding a bar where I could drink in comfort. The cred-
it and camaraderie I had built over the years at my accustomed spots
were not things you could transplant easily, like a heart. Sundered
from my familiar haunts I felt vulnerable and alone.

One night I was down in Ginza, where street after street features
building after building, each layered with a dozen or more bars, each
its own world with its own clientele. There are “Wafuku bars” where
the hostesses shuffle about in kimonos. There are “Auntie bars” spe-
cializing in motherly, elderly hostesses. I have seen piano bars staffed
by delinquent schoolgirls in sailor uniforms and others manned by
haughty young men in evening gowns. These strange lands are best
explored in the company of senior businessmen carrying limitless
expense accounts.

I was with Den Foo, one of my firm’s major clients. Den Foo is
the president of McDuffy Japan, the Asian flagship of the American
fast-food chain. He is the titan behind McDuffy’s oncologic spread
to the farthest parts of Japan. Den Foo had noticed the stylish, yet
functional, modular trash receptacles I had designed for the Kansai
franchises. To my dismay, he took a strong shine to me, and I soon
found myself obliged to accompany him to all his favorite bars and
cabarets. This night, he insisted on treating me to the Club Ayakōji
where the hostesses are Caucasian, and in his words, literally, “por-
table.” We always spoke Japanese together, but he had heard of my
English-language abilities. I think he wanted to demonstrate some
of his own.

We entered a narrow, elegantly decorated space. The hostesses
were young and pretty, the sort of inaccessible foreign beauties lust-
ed after by short-limbed, liver-lipped, boorish, misogynistic and xe-
nophobic Peter Pans, like Den Foo. These girls were fabulously paid to
breathe bad breath and cigarette smoke and cock a sympathetic ear
with a smile, night after night.

The club was nearly empty when we arrived. Den Foo imperi-
ously summoned three slender blondes to the table and commenced
a lewd dialogue about bodily parts which the girls handled with pro-
fessional charm. He poked and grabbed at their legs and breasts. They
parried with expert pouts and giggles. I drank a glass of brandy and
ate the chocolate-covered cracker sticks on the table. I listened to
Den Foo’s weird English—he could procure a word like “invagi-
nate,” to describe a tray of pig-in-a-blankets. He surprised me with a
display of alliterative scatology that would confound your average
Japanese student of the English language. At one point he produced
a pack of Vicks Drops and proffered one to the girls upon his wag-
ging tongue. Then he turned to me and said, “These are marvelously
efficacious!” I smiled helplessly. A half-hour passed. Den Foo’s ar-
ticulate anal-excreta spattered off the jaded hostesses. Soon he was
bored. He began making eyes at a dark-haired girl behind the bar.
The Mama-san said she was off-duty, but Den Foo was insistent. One
of the blondes went to tend bar and the brunette came over to our
table. In his heavily-accented English, Den Foo asked her name and
her bust size. She said her name was June. Den Foo boasted how he
had been photo-profiled recently in the Japan Times. He told her she
reminded him of Debra Winger. Then he asked her about her hair
color. Was it of uniform color all over the body? June looked at me
incredulously. I feigned a cough. Den Foo did something to her un-
der the table. She clenched both fists on the table. Then she lit his
cigarette. She squirmed in her chair kittenishly and slid into his em-
brace. He put one hand on hers. Something was transpiring under the
table. I gazed at the Impressionist prints on the wall. Suddenly there
was a scream and Den Foo was doubled over in his chair, gasping.

I explained to the Mama-san that Den Foo had had a recurrence of
an old lower abdominal ailment. I accompanied him off the floor and
downstairs to a cab. As we started to roll I saw June watching us from
the doorway, still with that plaintive look of worry. I called her the
next evening and asked her out. She was evasive. I was sure she be-
grudged me my cowardly behavior the night before. I stammered some-
thing about the weather. I babbled on about my securing a patent for
the Oe Mirror. Unimpressed, she began to joke on my name. “Oi-vey!”
she said. “Boy-Oi!” That cracked her up. Then she said okay, she
would meet me after work around midnight.

I arrived in Ginza a half-hour early. I walked about enjoying the
tranquility of the streets after-hours. The storefronts were dark and
shuttered. I passed a vendor of roasted chestnuts shrouded within an
atmosphere of aromatic vapors. There was a rā-men seller and a for-
tune teller. The streets were starting to fill with brightly-clad host-
esses clattering on their heels, bound for the last train out of Ginza. I
set a course for the Club Ayakōji. Unfortunately I hadn’t paid much
attention to the route when I was with Den Foo. I hadn’t asked June
for directions because I felt certain I could navigate by a gigantic
neon sign I had noticed on the roof of the building across the way.
This sign was a hot-red tube (read “Maru”) orbiting the Chinese char-
acter “Gen.” I spotted “Maru-Gen” in the sky from six blocks off and
homed in at an angle. It seemed a ways too far north, but I assumed
I had mis-estimated my distances. Also lights at night tend to be far-
ther than their promise. So I went on for another block and another.
Finally I arrived. Across the way there was an ugly, completely un-
familiar tile building, some sort of finance company. I jogged back the
way I came. Soon June would be out. I wiped my glasses which had
fogged and cut down an alley across the avenues. Far down the lane I
spied another “Maru-Gen” floating in the night sky. I imagined June
crossing her arms and looking up and down the street, frowning at
her watch. I ran. Standing under the sign I scanned the horizontal
roster of establishments hung on the opposite building. There was
no Club Ayakōji. I calmed myself with a round of Zen breathing ex-
ercises and boldly struck a new course. A block away, I sighted an-
other “Maru-Gen.” On the approach I could see it was distin-
guishably smaller than the others. Another decoy, a miniature. It was
ten after twelve. I never had and thus had never been late for a ren-
dezvous with an American girl before. How would she take it? She
must never know, must never picture me rushing desperately all
over Ginza, towed like a tide by these baleful, electric moons. I
searched my pockets in vain for the number of the Club Ayakōji. A
taxi appeared and I flagged it down. The driver knew of the club. He
drove a few blocks one way, and one block across the avenue, and
we were there. June was sitting on the sidewalk reading a men’s com-
ic book. She had on jeans and a white blouse, a down jacket draped
on her shoulders. She got up and said hello and offered me her cheek.
I shook her hand instead which she found amusing.

“I want to walk,” she said. So I waved the taxi on. June threw
away the comic. She sniffed inside her jacket and made a face.

“Those dresses,” she said. “They never wash them. You never
know who’s been wearing what.” She explained that all the girls
dressed off a communal rack of gowns. “I had on this silk dress to
night. It was real silk, but it really stank—like, under the arms were
kind of stiff.” She shot me a look, but I showed her only an expres-
sion of earnest concentration.

We walked beneath an elevated highway, roaring with night traf-
fic. We slurped soba from a van parked on a turnout. We lit incense
in a shadowy pocket shrine, and wandered on the back roads, inves-
tigating topological variations in the terrain, the hills and dales of
ancient Edo. I bought hot sake from a vending machine which we
drank in Shiba Park. She told me about life in rural Vermont where
she had grown up. She told me about some fellow she left behind. He
wrote her a letter care of American Express. I watched her eyes track
pleasurably, the arc of her memory.

We ascended the slope under the spread legs of Tokyo Tower
and arrived in Roppongi, settling tank for all Tokyo’s beautiful peo-
ple. She had in mind a club called The Charleston. A Sumo-esque youth
in black tie guarded the door. He waved June in and looked astounded
at me in passing, as if I were some brazen, unimaginably uncomple-
mentary escort. Inside, I recognized exactly the kind of crowd I most
hate—young, attractive, self-satisfied, ignorant, illiterate, yet judg-
mental. All the qualities to render inert my wisdom and charm and
cosmopolitan savoir-faire. Their hip, collegiate attire made my intel-
lectual black linen look drab and old. I felt my face flush. Except for
the bartender and the waiters I was almost the only Japanese. I in-
stinctively pressed close to June. She had this wary look about her.
She was trying not to appear a part of this scene. Still there seemed
to her a natural calling, some kinship there, like a disaffected bead of
mercury quivering beside a larger pool it’d split from. I strode to the
bar and ordered two cocktails. The bartender—a squinty buffoon
with a hick accent—ignored me. He seemed to stare right through
me as if I were mere air. I ordered again. A pale fop shouldered his
way in front of me and ordered drinks which came promptly. He was
telling a girl behind him how hard it was to do business in Japan.
“The problem is,” he said, “they don’t speak a lot of English.” He
said he was writing a “novelization” of his experiences in Japan.
Finally, my drinks came.

I found June within a small but loud crowd of baby-facers. It
was like a scene from Macbeth. They were standing around a steam-
ing black pot on a tripod, exuberantly forking chunks of bread into
its depths. June had a drink in one hand and a long fork in the other.
She reclined in the tweedy curve of a man’s arm.

At first I thought he was a Japanese-American. His styled black
hair had a little Malibu red in it. He wore half-tints to shroud his
Mongoloid eyes. He had the slack stance and diction of an American
and he had just the right amount of casual slob to his dress. Then he
singed his finger on the lip of the pot and I saw—he put the injured
digit to his ear—regarded as the coolest part of the body by only a
true Japanese!

He was being extremely solicitous to June. He directed his vapid
chatter directly at her. I saw his hand close on her shoulder. He was
telling her about prepping at Saint Paul’s. I stood closer to him, sized
him—my height but husky, laden with muscle—I thought, perhaps
from a diplomat’s son’s unrestricted diet of beef and corn. I broke in
as he was describing his scoring a hat trick in the New England Prep
School Lacrosse Finals.

“My name is Oe,” I said challengingly.
“I’m Ben,” he said, very friendly. “Ben” my ass, I thought. More
likely a wishful interpretation of something like “Benpi” or “Benjirō.”

“Ben what?” I asked.
“Inutake,” he replied after a pause. Literally, “Dog-Bamboo.” At
last, a chink in this otherwise seamless fellow. June noticed my rip-
ening smile and cut in.

“Ben went to St. Paul’s,” she said.
“Inu-ta-keh,” I repeated, then loudly: “Dog-Bamboo!”

The crowd tuned in to the hostilities.
“St. Paul’s a good school,” I said. “A first-rate, second-tier school,
if you can’t for instance get into a place like, say, Andover, where I,
by the way, studied.” I actually only spent an afternoon in the library
there once, reading The Return of the Native.

“Hey, you got a problem?” said Ben Dog-Bamboo. He asked it
half-seriously, still unwilling to be coaxed from his sunny amity into
my red waters. He picked a stray hair off June’s shoulder. I asked
him in Japanese whether by the way it was true that one of his tes-
ticles had not, in fact, descended. He laughed pleasantly. I repeated
the question in English. This silenced the crowd. Dog-Bamboo hugged
June in close and stared at me with lofty eyebrows and a conde-
scending expression of sympathy.

“My friend,” he said, “I think you’ve been watching too many
cowboy movies.”

I knew there were in English certain verbal cues for throwing
down the gauntlet, man-to-man. But for all my howling, aching will-
ingness, I was unable to rally the billions of synapses responsible for
discharging my formidable English-language abilities—I could not
produce the catalytic insults. The moment was passing. So I threw
my drink in his face. It was a good fight. Fast, fast and brutal. I and
he kicked into an aboriginal mode of destruction—inflict as much
hurt in as short a time as possible. None of the choreographed round-
houses like the movies. I hit him once in the mouth and I got in
several good shots to the chest and I caught him in the ear, ringingly,
I’m sure. And I hit him smack in the throat. In all honesty, he did me
well too. He split my lip in a way that would require twelve stitches
and I jammed my wrist painfully when I blasted him in the jaw. We
destroyed a table and smashed a lot of glass. We made unmistakeably
Japanese sounds of rage and pain. Then the bouncers were there.
They grabbed me and threw me out into a concrete telephone pole. I
waited for Dog-Bamboo to land beside me. Apparently he was being
ministered to inside. I was feeling for my glasses when June knelt
beside me and put a hand on my back.

She located my glasses and conducted me to a local hospital
where she supervised, she bullied, in her bad Japanese, the staff on
call. The doctor worked on my face and then my wrist which had
begun to swell. Then June brought me home and comforted me with
an unanticipated tenderness. She meticulously remedicated my
scrapes. She spoon-fed me with great dexterity so as not to wet my
healing lip. We watched an old American comedy on television, side
by side. I noticed her turning to me solicitously to make sure I got the
jokes. Sometime after three, she unrolled a spread of futons alongside
her own. She wanted to undress me and help me brush my teeth,
but I waved off these attentions. So we settled down under our layers
of soft, clean quilts. June turned off the light, leaned over to me and
said goodnight. If my wrist were not cracked and my lip split I would
have reached out and brought her close and kissed her with as much
gentle affection as I could muster.

During the night, her cat crossed my length and breadth repeat-
edly. Its passing rather added to the texture of my dreams, and I slept
the restful sleep of a day laborer, the deep sleep you sometimes real-
ize on rainy mornings.
