The Origin of the Nemesis
Jon Kawano

I fell in love with the Nemesis in the summer of 1978. That was
Tokyo. A town not impartial to romance. Any city will do when you’re
in love—St. Louis, Paris, New York—all you need is a park, a few
lonely lanes and a café or two. Everywhere you have the night. Idle a
while under a streetlight and you charge that spot with a moment of
memory. Enough of these moments and you will ping emotionally
everywhere you go, uptown, downtown, at crosswalks and monu
ments, waterfronts and alleys, under glowing clocks and signposts.
Time goes by. Then the town belongs to the one you loved.

Before and after me is a history of schoolboys, college students
and salary-men, all having passed the blue hour with Yuki Kara, alias
the Nemesis. The nickname was a consequence of her war with my
great friend, Oe. I had warned him about her powerful effect on men.
Most either loved or despised her, depending on how high they al
lowed their hopes to rise. Practical Oe never expected love, but he
wanted respect. The Nemesis, for the most part, expected to be left
alone. I hoped they would get along, but upon first sight of one an
other they were enemies.

We were all three employed by Hakuhodo Inc., the prestigious
and second-largest advertising agency in Japan. Miss Kara was part
of the MacDonalds Japan team. Next door to her was the Kirin-
Seagram room where I worked. Oe was officially assigned to the
Creative Division, but he frequently visited our floor to confer with
the account executives.

Oe had heard rumors of an American assigned to the Kirin ac
count, and he walked the halls until he heard either my excellent
English or my renegade Japanese. He introduced himself and of
fered to treat me to the finest rā-men shop in Tokyo. From then on
we often had lunch together. Sometimes, after work, he would take
me to one of his many drinking spots in the Yurakuchō area. Usually
it was just the two of us. Oe had few friends among his male co-
workers. It was as much his language abilities as his irregular profile
which set him apart. He ridiculed hostess bars and karaoke, and he
dismissed Japanese male camaraderie as “crypto-misogynist.”

Oe was thirty and single. He had about him the nervous air of a
boy-virgin which affected maternal and sexually-inhibited women
like drugged chocolate. I knew something of his kind of girl. Un
loved and unlovely, they widened their tiny eyes with eyeliner and
cast a chemical blush over their naturally buttery, smooth complex
ions. They washed regularly, shaved their upper lips and never mis
matched a skirt with the wrong shoes. Oe’s plain women fretted over
him but never despaired. Living at home and flush with disposable
income, they showered an indifferent Oe with gifts. One tall, execu
tive secretary presented him with an expensive electric typewriter
for Valentine’s Day. He lugged it into the Seagram room where he
ostentatiously offered to touch-type a page of the sales report. It is a
rare Japanese male at ease behind a keyboard, and more so one who’d
brag of his secretarial skills. Oe sensed he could air his conceits be
fore me without censure, and before long I was confided his greatest
deeds and feats, the highlights of his life. One of these, “The Oe
Mirror,” he both designed and patented. According to Oe, it reflected
an unreversed image of the viewer off a concave steel surface. Oe
boasted how he had mastered all of the intricate legal terminology
and drafted the patent application himself, saving “a veritable for
tune” in legal fees.

I was honestly impressed. I had encountered Japanese know-it-
alls before, but none with his nervy style. His pedantry fueled his
creativity which was real and unexpected. Once Oe met me for lunch
at Maxim’s in the basement of the Sony Building wearing an ill-
fitting pair of calico slacks which it was soon disclosed he had cut
and stitched together by hand.

“I am unafraid to dabble my talents in the emasculate arts,” he
said.

The cornerstone of his act, the plumb line of his eccentricity,
was his magnificent English. This he showed off arbitrarily, often at
the expense of his linguistically less-gifted peers. It was one good
show. He convincingly integrated the right mannerisms, accents, and
airs with his spoken English. Unlike most Japanese, he could prop
erly draw out the vowels in “okay.” He could cock a skeptical West
ern eyebrow. He knew how to use his hands and how to throw back
his head in exasperation and exclaim, “Oh, come on!”

Backstage, metaphorically speaking, were hours on hours of
meticulous rehearsal. Almost five thousand, admitted Oe. He had
perfected his “er”s and “el”s by taping American movies, radio and
television broadcasts, and then going over each dialog repeatedly,
phrase by phrase. He amassed his monstrous vocabulary by system-
atically categorizing and committing to memory every new word or
phrase encountered. He monitored his spoken Japanese with zeal,
scanning for meanings he was unable to communicate in English.
Anything that stumped him set him off. In a measured frenzy he
would scribble the unholy letters on one of the little cards he kept in
his wallet. Later he would process the day’s catch with the help of
the twelve-odd dictionaries on his desk.

Once when he was drunk, Oe allowed me to see his vocabulary
book. Here between covers was page after page of his tiny handwrit
ing. In each left margin were listed unfamiliar English words and
expressions. (One page at random from one of these notebooks reads
down from the top left: “aver,” “avocado,” “AWOL,” “juniper,”
“lather,” and “in the bag.”) Next to each entry was the definition in
Japanese. Next to this was written the context in which the vocabu
lary occurred. Finally, in triple-tiny letters, were three examples of
usage, and sometimes, in red ink, an example of incorrect usage. A
number of check marks in green ink decorated the blank space be
tween entries. Each check, he explained, represented one time he’d
either used or reviewed that particular word or phrase. Five or more
checks and he x’d the entry in red. When all of the twenty or so
entries on a page were x’d out, he stamped his name with a hanko in
the top right corner of the page. Eventually there was not a page
without its own round “Oe,” in Chinese characters, hanging like an
orange sun over the semantic plane. This completed one volume of
work. It was numbered, dated, bound in rubber bands and filed away.
Somewhere in Tokyo, Oe had stashed two sake barrels loaded with
fifty of these notebooks, along with a few hundred dialogs recorded
from English-language television. He was unable to destroy the evi
dence, but would hint at its existence when he was drunk or in a
certain introspective mood.

I liked to test the limits of his abilities. Normally, he could hold
his own against, out-spell, and out-articulate the average freshman
from, say, the University of Miami. If you knew how, it was possible
to expose his soft spots. I would accelerate my speech, blurring all
the consonants, then blast him with off-speed idioms and jargon. The
speed didn’t faze him, nor did the recondite vocabulary. The trick
was to find an artless word which wouldn’t commonly occur to news
writers or writers of language texts. I couldn’t trip him with “perspi
cacious,” but I might with something like “parboil.” Thus it was
with perverse alacrity that Oe frequented me, one of the few in the
city who could so bedevil him. I was only a symptom of his relent
less pursuit, his siege of the maddening, ever-dwindling state of im
perfection, which taunted him, like a calculus curve, ever approaching,
infinitesimally, yet never reaching, the status of a native speaker of
English.

The origin of the Nemesis turns in part about Oe’s pride and his
linguistic obsession. I recall one night, down along the tracks of the
Shinkansen near Yurakuchō where there was, and still may be, a small
bar where this night, Oe and I relaxed, eating marinated chicken on
skewers and drinking shōchū. Shōchū is a cheap, raw-tasting spirit,
distilled from sweet potatoes. Normally it is clear as water and is
known for its latent kick and its consequences the morning after.

The bar girl set down a small bottle brimming with a pink-tinged
liquid. Oe poured me a glass and let me return the favor.

“Drink,” he commanded. We clinked glasses and drank. There
was, mingling with the familiar taste, a fruity tingle, faintly sweet.

“Pomegranate shōchū,” said Oe. “Brewed by the master him
self. He’ll only dispatch a bottle to his favored clientele.”

“I like it,” I said.

“You won’t find it in any liquor store across Japan,” said Oe. He
refilled our glasses and the bottle was empty. Over his shoulder I
could see the master talking with two businessmen at the counter.
They turned away when I looked up.

“Ignore them,” said Oe, following my gaze. “It’s most
discombobulating for them to hear a Japanese converse in other than
broken English.”

“Jya, Nihongo de hanashimashō?” I said.

“Your cadence betrays you,” said Oe. He repeated the phrase for
me with the properly-clipped rhythm. The businessmen made guttural
sounds of amusement.

“Dīsu ī za pen!” I said loudly, mimicking the first English
learned by all Japanese in school.

Oe tittered nervously. I held up a napkin.

“Dīsu ī za na-pu-kin!”
“Cut it out, already,” said Oe.

“Dīsu ī za boo-ku! Come on, Oe, fall in. How d’you sink obbu
Jah-pan?”

“Not interested,” said Oe, unable to maintain his smile.

I laughed. It was easy to imagine a younger, humbler, Japanesier
Oe, practicing, distending his tongue and lips in front of a mirror.

“Devolve, Oe, to an earlier time, when you yourself spoke a halt
ing, crude, virtually incomprehensible grade of English…”

“Sort of like your Japanese,” he countered. He knew how to throw
the heat back at the source. I decided to acquaint him with the rhet
orical feint which he had little experience with.

“Yes,” I conceded carelessly, “my utterly, embarrassingly flawed
Japanese. A self-conscious, synthetic, fraudulent improvisation, I am
the first to admit. Now about your English…” Oe rolled his eyes the
way I had once shown him. But he was waiting to hear what I had to
say.

“The problem with your English, Oe, if you are at all interested…”

Oe was drinking his shōchū with great relish.

“…the problem with your English, is its disturbing lack of integ
rity.”

“How so?” asked Oe, mesmerized apparently, by something at
the bottom of his glass.

“I refer, if you really want to know, and you do, to its rather
sycophantic quality. Cringing, almost.” Oe was silent. I continued:

“It lacks character, in my opinion. I mean, if I really listen to your
perfect English, I can hear you practicing. I can see you thinking
about it, wringing out everything possibly Japanese about your de
livery. This gives me the creeps.”

Oe’s face was calm, but there was sweat on his lip and forehead.
I wish now I had stopped there, but I didn’t.

“I don’t think you should sacrifice your native character to speak
a foreign language. Like, in prep school, I remember this girl in my
French class. Her family had once lived in Europe and she had been
to France many times. When she spoke Français she’d go into this
phony impersonation of a Grand Dame—bug out her eyes, wave her
fingers and go ‘Oo-la-la!’ Then there was this guy from Lawrence,
Massachusetts. And he spoke French with this resolutely unyielding
Boston accent. You could barely understand him, but you could hear
the Boston in him and he was game, and he persevered. And you
know, if I were a Frenchman, I think I’d much rather speak with him
over her. As an American, I think I’d rather hear the honest English
of, say, Yuki Kara?”

“Shōchū mō ippon kudasai!” thundered Oe to the bar girl. I had
unwittingly breached a limit. He had often ridiculed Miss Kara’s
“barely functional” level of English. His giddy pleasure on those
occasions now converted to rage. I tried to distract him. Behind the
counter, I saw the girl scurrying to fill Oe’s order.

“I like her bangs,” I said.

Oe became alert. Something I said had flagged his attention. I
saw his hand go for his back pocket, but he checked the motion and
brought both arms to the table.

“Yes, they’re not bad,” he said, looking toward the girl.

“What’re not bad?” I asked casually.

“I mean the bangs.”

“Bangs? What are you talking about, Oe?”

“I heard you.”

“I’m not sure we’re talking about the same thing. Personally,
I’ve always liked the look. But there are bangs, and there are bangs.”

Oe would not reply.

“Perhaps you yourself, once sported them as a child?”

“Sported what?” said Oe, stalling.

“Bangs.”

Oe stared at me with tired, red eyes.

“What are bangs?” he said with a sigh.

I drew the blade of my hand across my forehead. Oe didn’t un
derstand. Then the girl arrived with the shōchū, and I repeated the
motion lightly across her forehead. She gave a “Kyaa!” of surprise.

Oe nodded and reached for the vocabulary card in his wallet.

The next morning I was halfway through a long translation of
whiskey terminology when Oe dropped by. He could see I was busy,
but he wouldn’t leave. Perhaps he thought he could erase all memory
of the previous evening by swamping my succeeding hours with fresh
doses of the Oe experience. He pestered me all morning and insisted
I lunch with him on a fantastic array of sushi he had delivered in
black lacquer boxes. He was with me at three when I went next door
for tea with the ladies of the MacDonalds account. Oe pulled up at
the front of the room to chat with Misses Imagawa and Kikuchi. I
slipped over to the window where Yuki Kara sat at her desk, peeling
a pear. She cut me a half and we discussed, in Japanese, the differ
ences between the round, appley thing we were eating, and a proper
Western pear. Then she showed me some PR fliers, inky and aro
matic, which had just returned from the printer. She asked me what I
thought of the design.

Before I could reply, Oe was there, peering over my shoulder.

“The logo, I noticed, is a little off center,” he said, “and that
subtitle looks a trifle isolated. I would put it all on a grid, myself.
And don’t you think the color is a little subtle for a POP display? It’s
what I would call—”

“Watashi no shigoto ni, kuchi o dasanai de!” sounded Miss Kara.

“I was only trying to help,” he said, and stepped away.

“Ignore him,” I called, but he was gone.

Over by the door, Imagawa and Kikuchi hunched their backs at
us expressively. Yuki Kara dropped her head to one side and looked
serenely out the window.

Thus they became enemies. Officially now, for in Japan, har
mony is often a function of cloaked enmity. I tried not to ally myself
with either against the other. This was mostly an Oe war, actually.
Miss Kara was content to ignore him much as she always had. But
Oe found her manner increasingly unbearable. He detected some
thing in her movements, her tone of voice, the tilt of her shoulders,
all calculated to belittle him.

“If you were Japanese, you would see,” said Oe. “She hates me.”
I withheld my sympathy. Oe leaned close.

“She’s a punk,” he confided. “She sleeps around.”
He turned his ear toward the light partition separating the K. S.
and MacDonalds rooms. On the far side I heard Miss Kara clear her
throat.

“Lay off,” I said, choosing my words carefully, “for your nem
esis has not the strongest of constitutions today, suffering as she is
from a certain upper respiratory oxtipation.”

“Oxtipation?” Oe reached for his vocabulary card.
“Congestion,” I explained. He scribbled something down. Clever
Oe. I should have recognized “oxtipation” as exactly the kind of use
less word he would have packed away long ago.

A few days later we were having drinks at a tiny bar in Shinjuku
where Oe kept on the shelf his personal bottle of Suntory Old. Whis
key, Suntory or otherwise, affected Oe as could no amount of shōchū.
Beaming, red, he brought his face barely an inch from mine and snick
ered.

“I saw the Nemesis come out of a love hotel with a man,” he
whispered.

“That’s her business,” I said, “who was he?”
“I don’t know.”

“By the way,” I said, “‘nemesis’ is always used with a posses
sive. e.g., Superman’s nemesis is kryptonite. Ahab’s nemesis is Moby
Dick. Elmer Fudd’s nemesis is—”

“Bugs Bunny!” said Oe, catching on.

“And Oe’s nemesis is...?”

He balked. Much as he hated all forms of incorrect English, he
was equally loath to adopt the necessary possessive in conjunction
with his enemy.

Finally though, he preferred the defective euphemism over hav
ing to suffer his lips the intimacy of “my nemesis.” It became a regu
lar part of his repertoire from the following afternoon.

“Give my regards to the Nemesis,” he said to me with a wink.
I, too, came to be taken with the name, using it with as much
affection as did Oe with disdain. The Nemesis never noticed the in
trigue. Much later—it was in the spring—I told her the story, be
neath the cherry blossoms, under the night sky over Inokashira Park.
She didn’t say so, but I think she was secretly pleased, being as she is
a woman truly able to appreciate a nom de guerre forged in the fire
between souls.
